README.md, before:

# AutoGVP scripts
Scripts for running autoGVP and the pre processing steps

# Clone repo
Autogvp — https://github.com/diskin-lab-chop/AutoGVP?tab=readme-ov-file
```bash
cd ~/OpenPedCan_Data/
git clone https://github.com/diskin-lab-chop/AutoGVP.git
```

# The full script, to run all steps, is located at `/scr1/users/stearb/U24/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/custom_autogvp.sh` and the outputs are currently in `/mnt/isilon/opentargets/U24KG/data/autogvp_results`
 
# First, Split multi-patient VCF files into single VCF files (if necessary). 
List of proband IDs were pulled from the Variant Workbench (VWB) table called `Occurences`
with the following code (Code is in the U24 Data Studio session on CAVATICA):
```python
ocr = spark.read.parquet(OCR_STUDY_PATH).where( (F.col('is_proband') == True))
chd = ocr.select('sample_id').distinct().toPandas()
pd.DataFrame(chd['sample_id'].values).to_csv('/sbgenomics/output-files/chd_probands.txt', index=False,header=False)
```


There are two bash scripts that split the multi-patient VCFs. 
~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/**split_vcfs.sh** --> uses bcftools to split the VCFs
~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/**run_splits.sh** --> calls split_vcfs.sh for each cohort (eg CHD, NBL, GNINT, etc.)

```
# (ignore the names of the files eg. CHD_KF_*, these are incorrect)
GNINT_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs001846/"
CHD_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs001138/vcf/vep_105/"
NBL_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs001436/vcf/"
RSBD_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs002590/vcf/"
MMC_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs002187/"
 
# Proband lists locations
chd_probands= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/proband_ids/chd_probands.txt
nbl_probands= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/proband_ids/nbl_probands.txt
gnint_probands= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/proband_ids/gnint_probands.txt

# Output dirs
chd_out_dir= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/chd/
gnint_out_dir= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/gnint/
nbl_out_dir= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/nbl/
```


# 1. InterVar 
### Needs to be run using the HPC via SLURM job submission. See below for details
takes about an hour per a 2GB VCF...
Directory = /scr1/users/stearb/U24/InterVar

```bash
git clone https://github.com/WGLab/InterVar.git
# put mim2gene.txt in intervar/Intervar/intervardb/, aka GitHub repo dir.
curl https://www.omim.org/static/omim/data/mim2gene.txt > intervar/Intervar/intervardb/mim2gene.txt  
```
Copy Perl scripts from annovar to interVar directory (InterVar needs several of them.)
`cp ~/OpenPedCan_Data/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/prereqs/annovar/*.pl ~/OpenPedCan_Data/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/prereqs/intervar/InterVar/`

Run in the InterVar GitHub directory (this will d/l a bunch of large files the first time it's run.)
```
python Intervar.py -b hg38 -i ~/OpenPedCan_Data/CHD_KF_phs001846/809aa738-a3a2-4923-ae67-b065ba5f353e.single.vqsr.filtered.vep_105.vcf.gz --input_type=VCF -o test_VEP_interVar
```


## Submit an array job to process both CHD and NBL cohorts 

get number of files in both cohorts. Set it as a parameter in the script you will run sbatch with.
```
# https://stackoverflow.com/questions/77789177/how-to-run-a-slurm-job-array-that-iterates-over-a-number-of-files
# for TALL files --> ls /mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/CHD_KF_002276/vcf/*.single.vqsr.filtered.vep_105.vcf.gz > tall_files_list.txt
ls /mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/chd/*single.vcf.gz > chd_files_list.txt
cat chd_files_list.txt nbl_files_list.txt > chd_nbl_vcfs.txt
rm chd_files_list.txt nbl_files_list.txt 
wc -l chd_nbl_vcfs.txt     # put this in this parameter #SBATCH --array=1-1157

# make sure the full path is present in these files. If not, you can prepend the lines of the file with the missing path:
awk '{print "/mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/rsbd/" $0}' rsbd_vcf_files.txt > rsbd_files.txt

# and run with:
# this will launch 1157 jobs, so test before you do this
sbatch --array=1-1157 run_intervar.sh 
```

# Check output and Clean up files from InterVar runs.
Look at the output files to check if there were errors:
```
# check if any of the interval jobs had an ‘Error:’ 
grep -rnw 'out_files/' -e 'Error:' 
```
If you do `| wc -l` , you can get the number of files that have an ‘Error:’

grep -rnw 'out_files_chd_nbl/' -e 'Error:' | wc -l  ---> ~30 misssing VCFs for chd & nbl run
grep -rnw 'out_files_gnint_mmc/' -e 'Error:' | wc -l  ---> 18 missing VCFs for gnint & mmc  run


After running, remove intervar input files. Need to do this for each directory we run intervar for.
```
rm /mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcf/chd/*.avinput
```






# 2. Annovar 
https://annovar.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/
Directory = ~/OpenPedCan_Data/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/prereqs/annovar 

Download ANNOVAR from website
Need to enter email on website and they will send download link.
tar -xvzf annovar.latest.tar.gz



First run these commands in annovar directory to download additional db files:
```
perl annotate_variation.pl -buildver hg38 -downdb -webfrom annovar gnomad211_exome humandb/
perl annotate_variation.pl -buildver hg38 -downdb -webfrom annovar gnomad211_genome humandb/

# annovar complains that these files don't exist in the hg38/ folder so make hg38 folder and move them into it
mkdir hg38
mv humandb/hg38_gnomad211_* hg38
```

Run Annovar:
```
perl table_annovar.pl data/test_VEP.vcf hg38 --buildver hg38 --out test_VEP --remove --protocol gnomad211_exome,gnomad211_genome --operation f,f --vcfinput
```



# 3. AutoPVS1
```
# Clone repo
git clone https://github.com/d3b-center/D3b-autoPVS1.git
```

To get the input files needed to run AutoPVS1, navigate to here: https://github.com/d3b-center/D3b-autoPVS1/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#5-configuration and click the link under the config.ini example, which will take you to CAVATICA. Download the `autoPVS1_references_sym_updated.tar.gz` file and place it in the AutoPVS1 directory.


### Liftover of VEP 104 gene symbols to VEP 105 gene symbols
...


# 4. Run AutoGVP
```
No docker on HPC, use singularity to pull docker image —
https://elearning.vib.be/courses/introduction-to-docker/lessons/run-and-execute-singularity-images/topic/using-docker-images-with-singularity/

# From autoGVP directory:
# download files
scripts/download_db_files.sh
module load R
# get clinvar annotations
Rscript scripts/select-clinVar-submissions.R --variant_summary data/variant_summary.txt.gz --submission_summary data/submission_summary.txt.gz --outdir results --conceptID_list data/clinvar_cpg_concept_ids.txt --conflict_res "latest"
```

Commit message:

Update README with output storage and script usage
Added details about storing full annotation outputs and finding unrun VCFs.

README.md, after:

# AutoGVP scripts
Scripts for running autoGVP and the pre processing steps

# Clone repo
Autogvp — https://github.com/diskin-lab-chop/AutoGVP?tab=readme-ov-file
```bash
cd ~/OpenPedCan_Data/
git clone https://github.com/diskin-lab-chop/AutoGVP.git
```

# The full script, to run all steps, is located at `/scr1/users/stearb/U24/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/custom_autogvp.sh` and the outputs are currently in `/mnt/isilon/opentargets/U24KG/data/autogvp_results`. 
# When I reran the cohorts using 1% MAF thresold and added GQ>10, I am now storing the full annotation autogvp outputs in /mnt/isilon/opentargets/U24KG/data/autogvp_results/data2026/

### To automatically find which VCFs have not been run yet, use this script with the cohort abbr. as the only arg.
```/mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/scripts/get_remaining_files.sh nbl```
 
# First, Split multi-patient VCF files into single VCF files (if necessary). 
List of proband IDs were pulled from the Variant Workbench (VWB) table called `Occurences`
with the following code (Code is in the U24 Data Studio session on CAVATICA):
```python
ocr = spark.read.parquet(OCR_STUDY_PATH).where( (F.col('is_proband') == True))
chd = ocr.select('sample_id').distinct().toPandas()
pd.DataFrame(chd['sample_id'].values).to_csv('/sbgenomics/output-files/chd_probands.txt', index=False,header=False)
```


There are two bash scripts that split the multi-patient VCFs. 
~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/**split_vcfs.sh** --> uses bcftools to split the VCFs
~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/**run_splits.sh** --> calls split_vcfs.sh for each cohort (eg CHD, NBL, GNINT, etc.)

```
# (ignore the names of the files eg. CHD_KF_*, these are incorrect)
GNINT_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs001846/"
CHD_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs001138/vcf/vep_105/"
NBL_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs001436/vcf/"
RSBD_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs002590/vcf/"
MMC_DIR="${OPEN_PEDCAN_DIR}/CHD_KF_phs002187/"
 
# Proband lists locations
chd_probands= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/proband_ids/chd_probands.txt
nbl_probands= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/proband_ids/nbl_probands.txt
gnint_probands= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/proband_ids/gnint_probands.txt

# Output dirs
chd_out_dir= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/chd/
gnint_out_dir= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/gnint/
nbl_out_dir= ~/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/nbl/
```


# 1. InterVar 
### Needs to be run using the HPC via SLURM job submission. See below for details
takes about an hour per a 2GB VCF...
Directory = /scr1/users/stearb/U24/InterVar

```bash
git clone https://github.com/WGLab/InterVar.git
# put mim2gene.txt in intervar/Intervar/intervardb/, aka GitHub repo dir.
curl https://www.omim.org/static/omim/data/mim2gene.txt > intervar/Intervar/intervardb/mim2gene.txt  
```
Copy Perl scripts from annovar to interVar directory (InterVar needs several of them.)
`cp ~/OpenPedCan_Data/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/prereqs/annovar/*.pl ~/OpenPedCan_Data/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/prereqs/intervar/InterVar/`

Run in the InterVar GitHub directory (this will d/l a bunch of large files the first time it's run.)
```
python Intervar.py -b hg38 -i ~/OpenPedCan_Data/CHD_KF_phs001846/809aa738-a3a2-4923-ae67-b065ba5f353e.single.vqsr.filtered.vep_105.vcf.gz --input_type=VCF -o test_VEP_interVar
```


## Submit an array job to process both CHD and NBL cohorts 

get number of files in both cohorts. Set it as a parameter in the script you will run sbatch with.
```
# https://stackoverflow.com/questions/77789177/how-to-run-a-slurm-job-array-that-iterates-over-a-number-of-files
# for TALL files --> ls /mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/CHD_KF_002276/vcf/*.single.vqsr.filtered.vep_105.vcf.gz > tall_files_list.txt
ls /mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/chd/*single.vcf.gz > chd_files_list.txt
cat chd_files_list.txt nbl_files_list.txt > chd_nbl_vcfs.txt
rm chd_files_list.txt nbl_files_list.txt 
wc -l chd_nbl_vcfs.txt     # put this in this parameter #SBATCH --array=1-1157

# make sure the full path is present in these files. If not, you can prepend the lines of the file with the missing path:
awk '{print "/mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcfs/rsbd/" $0}' rsbd_vcf_files.txt > rsbd_files.txt

# and run with:
# this will launch 1157 jobs, so test before you do this
sbatch --array=1-1157 run_intervar.sh 
```

# Check output and Clean up files from InterVar runs.
Look at the output files to check if there were errors:
```
# check if any of the interval jobs had an ‘Error:’ 
grep -rnw 'out_files/' -e 'Error:' 
```
If you do `| wc -l` , you can get the number of files that have an ‘Error:’

grep -rnw 'out_files_chd_nbl/' -e 'Error:' | wc -l  ---> ~30 misssing VCFs for chd & nbl run
grep -rnw 'out_files_gnint_mmc/' -e 'Error:' | wc -l  ---> 18 missing VCFs for gnint & mmc  run


After running, remove intervar input files. Need to do this for each directory we run intervar for.
```
rm /mnt/isilon/opentargets/OpenPedCan_Data/single_vcfs/split_vcf/chd/*.avinput
```






# 2. Annovar 
https://annovar.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/
Directory = ~/OpenPedCan_Data/autoGVP/AutoGVP-main/prereqs/annovar 

Download ANNOVAR from website
Need to enter email on website and they will send download link.
tar -xvzf annovar.latest.tar.gz



First run these commands in annovar directory to download additional db files:
```
perl annotate_variation.pl -buildver hg38 -downdb -webfrom annovar gnomad211_exome humandb/
perl annotate_variation.pl -buildver hg38 -downdb -webfrom annovar gnomad211_genome humandb/

# annovar complains that these files don't exist in the hg38/ folder so make hg38 folder and move them into it
mkdir hg38
mv humandb/hg38_gnomad211_* hg38
```

Run Annovar:
```
perl table_annovar.pl data/test_VEP.vcf hg38 --buildver hg38 --out test_VEP --remove --protocol gnomad211_exome,gnomad211_genome --operation f,f --vcfinput
```



# 3. AutoPVS1
```
# Clone repo
git clone https://github.com/d3b-center/D3b-autoPVS1.git
```

To get the input files needed to run AutoPVS1, navigate to here: https://github.com/d3b-center/D3b-autoPVS1/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#5-configuration and click the link under the config.ini example, which will take you to CAVATICA. Download the `autoPVS1_references_sym_updated.tar.gz` file and place it in the AutoPVS1 directory.


### Liftover of VEP 104 gene symbols to VEP 105 gene symbols
...


# 4. Run AutoGVP
```
No docker on HPC, use singularity to pull docker image —
https://elearning.vib.be/courses/introduction-to-docker/lessons/run-and-execute-singularity-images/topic/using-docker-images-with-singularity/

# From autoGVP directory:
# download files
scripts/download_db_files.sh
module load R
# get clinvar annotations
Rscript scripts/select-clinVar-submissions.R --variant_summary data/variant_summary.txt.gz --submission_summary data/submission_summary.txt.gz --outdir results --conceptID_list data/clinvar_cpg_concept_ids.txt --conflict_res "latest"
```
